Plant diseases, pest infestation, weed pressure, and nutrient deficiencies are some of the grand challenges for any agricultural producer, at any location and for whatever commodities or size of the operation is dealing daily. For instance, in the United States, plant disease causes losses of between 10 and 30 percent of the agricultural crop production annually. Therefore, farmers must promptly diagnose the different types of plant diseases to stop its spread within their agricultural fields. Currently, farmers try to diagnose plant diseases through optical observation of plant leaves’ symptoms, which incorporates a significantly high degree of complexity. Imagine a smart mobile-based system that farmers can use to identify the different types of plant diseases with high accuracy. Such systems would help both small and large-scale farmers to make the right decisions on which fertilizers to use to confront plant diseases in their crops. In this project, we tried to realize such systems by developing an AI-powered mobile-based system to automate the plant leaf disease diagnosis process. The developed system uses Convolutional Neural networks (CNN) as an underlying Deep Learning (DL) engine for classifying 38 disease categories. We used an open dataset containing 96,206 images of plant leaves of healthy and infected plants for training, validating, and testing the CNN model. The user interface is developed as an Android mobile app, allowing farmers to capture a photo of the infected plant leaves. It then displays the disease category along with the confidence percentage. It is expected that this system would create a better opportunity for farmers to keep their crops healthy and eliminate the use of wrong fertilizers that could stress the plants. Finally, we evaluated our system using various performance metrics such as classification accuracy, processing time, etc.
